DEP: design doc for operator out-of-band tasks. (#757)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/proposals/05-etcd-operator-tasks.md

---
title: operator out-of-band tasks
dep-number: 05
creation-date: 6th Dec'2023
status: implementable
authors:
- "@ishan" 
- "@madhav"
- "@sesha"
reviewers:

> - "@etcd-druid-maintainers"

Author: >  It makes sense to link to the maintainers list, but I'm not sure if the markdown format would be supported in github. Please check this before making the change.

markdown is not allowing it, so not make sense to me.

      * [Trigger on-demand full/delta snapshot](#trigger-on-demand-fulldelta-snapshot)
      * [Trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster](#trigger-on-demand-maintenance-of-etcd-cluster)
      * [Copy backups from one object store to another object store](#copy-the-backups-from-one-object-store-to-another-object-store)
  * [Metrics](#metrics)

## Summary

This DEP proposes an enhancement to `etcd-druid`'s capabilities to handle [out-of-band](#terminology) tasks, which are presently performed manually or invoked programmatically via sub-optimal APIs. The document proposes the establishment of an unified interface by defining a well-structured API to harmonize the initiation of any `out-of-band` task, monitor its status, and simplify the process of adding new tasks and managing their lifecycle.

## Terminology

* **druid:** [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) is an operator to manage the etcd clusters.

* **backup-sidecar:** It is the etcd-backup-restore sidecar container running in each etcd-member pod of etcd cluster.

* **leading-backup-sidecar:** A backup-sidecar that is associated to an etcd leader of an etcd cluster.

> * **out-of-band task** Any on-demand tasks/operations that can be executed on an etcd cluster without modifying the Etcd custom resource spec (desired state).

Author: * **out-of-band task:** Any on-demand tasks/operations that can be executed on an etcd cluster without modifying the [Etcd custom resource spec](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/9c5f8254e3aeb24c1e3e88d17d8d1de336ce981b/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L272-L273) (desired state)

## Motivation

> Today, [Etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) mainly acts as an etcd cluster provisioner(creation, maintenance and deletion). In future, capabilities of etcd-druid will be enhanced via [etcd-member](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/8ac70d512969c2e12e666d923d7d35fdab1e0f8e/docs/proposals/04-etcd-member-custom-resource.md) proposal by providing it access to a much more detailed information about each etcd cluster member. While we enhance the reconciliation and monitoring capabilities of etcd-druid, it still lacks an ability to provide an easy-to-use hook to trigger `out-of-band` tasks on an existing etcd cluster.

Author: > it still lacks the ability to allow users to invoke `out-of-band` operations on an existing etcd cluster.

I prefer it to call `out-of-band` tasks, to keep things and terminology constant through out the doc.

There are new learnings while operating etcd clusters at scale. It has been observed that we regularly need capabilities to trigger `out-of-band` tasks which are out of the purview of a regular etcd reconciliation run. Many of these tasks are a multi-step process and doing it manually is error-prone even if an operator follows a well-written step-by-step guide. Thus there is a need to automate these tasks to alleviate mistakes.
Some examples of an `on-demand/out-of-band` operations:

* Recover from a permament quorum loss.
* Trigger an on-demand full/delta snapshot.
* Trigger an on-demand snapshot compaction.

> * Trigger an on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster.

Reviewer: I'm guessing you are talking about supporting the operation mentioned in the upstream doc here.
```suggestion
* Trigger an on-demand [maintenance of etcd cluster](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/op-guide/maintenance/).
```

Author: I have moved this link to where we have defined/described each operations.

      name: <operation-name>
      state: <task state as seen at the completion of last operation>
      lastTransitionTime: <time of transition to this state>
      reason: <reason/message if any>
    conditions:
      - type: <type of condition>
        status: <status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown>
        lastTransitionTime: <last time the condition transitioned from one status to another>
        reason: <programmatic identifier indicating the reason for the condition's last transition>
        message: <human readable message indicating details about the transition>
```

> NOTE: The above custom resource YAML serves as a template which will be used to further create a CRD and Golang APIs.

### Golang API

```go
// EtcdOperatorTask represents an out-of-band operator task.
type EtcdOperatorTask struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta
  metav1.ObjectMeta

  // Spec is the specification of the task.
  Spec EtcdOperatorTaskSpec
  // Status is most recently observed status of the task.
  Status EtcdOperatorTaskStatus
}
```

#### Spec

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the spec (desired state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

> * To capture the type of `out-of-band` operator task to be performed, `taskType` field should be defined in spec. It can have values of all supported "out-of-band" operations/tasks eg. "OnDemandSnaphotTask", "QuorumLossRecoveryTask" etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To capture the type of `out-of-band` operator task to be performed, `taskType` field should be defined in spec. It can have values of any supported "out-of-band" operations/tasks eg. "OnDemandSnaphotTask", "QuorumLossRecoveryTask" etc.
```

> * To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.taskConfig` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task may have different specifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.Config` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task may have different specifications.
```

Reviewer: We don't do the same change request in line 136 for`taskType` as we do here for `taskConfig`. Its a litt confusing to read what is the agreement on semantics. 
```suggestion
* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `taskConfig` field should be defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task may have different specifications.
```

> * To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.taskConfig` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task may have different specifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.taskConfig` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task might need different input configuration.
```

```go
// EtcdOperatorTaskSpec is the spec for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskSpec struct {
  
  // Type specifies the type of out-of-band operator task to be performed. 
  Type string `json:"taskType"`

  // Config is a task specific configuration.
  Config *runtime.RawExtension `json:"taskConfig,omitempty"`

  // TTLSecondsAfterFinished is the time-to-live after which the task and 
  // related resources will be garbage collected.
  // +optional
  TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Status

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the `Status` (current state) of the EtcdOperatorTask custom resource as the custom resource's `Status` will be used to monitor the progress of the task.

> * To capture the Status of a task, a field `taskStatus` is defined in status.

Reviewer 2: Also add what are the possible values of state. Perhaps we should rename this field to `State`

* If operation involves many stages, so to capture the status of intermediate or any stage, `.status.lastOperation` will be useful.

```go
// TaskState represents the state of the task.
type TaskState string

const (
  Failed TaskState = "failed"
  Pending TaskState = "pending"
  Rejected TaskState = "rejected"
  Completed TaskState = "completed"

>   InProgress TaskState = "inProgress"

Reviewer: Just a wild thought, can you have a situation where you would like to cancel an InProgress task and you would like to capture the state or its equivalent to deleting a task which will show a terminating state anyways for the resource.

Reviewer: Cool, may be we keep it out-of-scope and do it only if we see a real need and not just in theory. 
You can resolve this once its put in the doc.

Reviewer: I see its already there with the new commit https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757/commits/8a497103210dd3542175944af2b627a880e421bc.
 Hence resolving it.

Author: We also had a discussion around it. Take this scenario:
`on-demand full snapshot` tasks has been triggered on a cluster which has lost the quorum permanently and then operator triggered the `Recover from permanent quorum loss` task, then operator should able to `abort/suspend` the previous task which he/she triggered (in this `on-demand full snapshot` ).
To solve such scenarios, we decided to go with `pre-conditions` for each task, it those pre-conditions not met then task should be `rejected`. That's why you see `rejected` state but not `suspend` state.

)

// EtcdOperatorTaskStatus is the status for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskStatus struct {
  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for the resource.
  ObservedGeneration *int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  // Status of the task

>   Status TaskState `json:"taskStatus"`

Reviewer 2: `status.Status` does not make much sense.  We can rename this to either `State` or `LastState` which represents the last known state of this task.

Author: yes, I agree ... I was thinking the same.

Reviewer 2: Also consider that the `LastOperation` already has a `State` field in it. Typically the `LastOperation.State` will have the same value as `status.State` right? If yes then do we really need `status.State` field?

* Each `out-of-band` task may have some task specific configuration defined in [.spec.taskConfig](#spec).
* The controller (`operator-task-controller`) needs to parse this task specific config, which comes as a RawExtension, according to the schema defined for each task.
* Moreover, all tasks have to adhere to some prerequisites(a.k.a `pre-conditions`) which will be necessary to execute the task. Authors propose to define pre-conditions for each task, which must be met for the task to be eligible for execution otherwise that task should be rejected.
* If multiple tasks are invoked simultaneously or in `pending` state, then they will be executed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner.

> Note: Dependent ordering among tasks will be addresed later which may enable concurrent execution of tasks.

#### Deletion

`Etcd-druid` will ensure that it garbage collects the custom resources and any other k8s resources created to realise the task as per `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec) or it assumes a default expiry time.

> ### Use Cases

Reviewer: I was wondering looking at the below use case and the possibility of integrating esp. with `gardenctl` can we have options where an operator might like to run an operation across shoots for e.g. 
- some of the selected shoots where he see a need 
- all shoots in a project as the problem is faced by all of them due to some nuance in the behavior 
- all shoots in a seed as we need to do some remediation across all shoots 
Does this change the design or implementation from a druid perspective esp. like selectors for which etcd to pick. 

Just thinking out loud, so feel free to ignore.

Reviewer 2: You can do this now as well by creating one operator task per etcd resource. 
Regarding integration with `gardenctl` - yes it can be done for g/g use cases but we are now positioning druid to be used outside g/g as well and therefore what you ask can easily be one operation for `druidctl`. In this proposal we have not detailed that aspect as that will be a separate proposal/document detailing out what is possible using druid specific ctl extension.

Reviewer: >You can do this now as well by creating one operator task per etcd resource.
Yes, but this response is good for feature tick point of view, consumption wise i'll go with the label selector approach you mentioned. 

Are you planning to have it in scope then? Its not obvious from the docs that you have such an intent.

Reviewer 2: >Are you planning to have it in scope then? Its not obvious from the docs that you have such an intent.

This will be part of the CLI and that is not part of this proposal.

`etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags). If and when this threshold is breached then only a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction is required.

##### Possible scenarios

* Full snapshot taken via compaction job is better as compared to full snapshot taken directly from etcd cluster as full snapshot taken via snapshot compaction is taken after [defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) which makes it smaller (more compacted) in size.
* Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but full snapshot taken by compaction job is developed separately with zero effect on the running cluster.

##### Task Config

We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

##### Pre-Conditions

> * There should not be a `on-demand snapshot-compaction` task already running for the same etcd cluster.

Reviewer: Again a thought, will it be more clean, if this operation creates an compaction job on demand instead.  
In this case if there is any subsequent compaction job which was about to get triggered with delta's reaching the threshold, then it will not run as the compaction already has a logic to check for any running jobs before initiating a new one.

Reviewer 2: >if this operation creates an compaction job on demand instead.

Did not understand. All of these use cases are on-demand/out-of-band tasks.

Reviewer: >There should not be a `on-demand snapshot-compaction` task already running for the same etcd cluster. 
I don't see the current solution can provide a deterministic behaviour here unless you ensure you run on-demand snapshot compaction also as a job like the regular compaction-snapshot job. 

Case in hand.
compaction delta threshold: 100
t(-1): deltas: 99
t0: no compaction job running; (ondemand snapshot is triggered)
t0: deltas:100 --> compaction job is triggered
t1: can t0 happen?

Author: >  In this case if there is any subsequent compaction job which was about to get triggered with delta's reaching the threshold, then it will not run as the compaction already has a logic to check for any running jobs before initiating a new one.

yes, that's correct but why you want to run `on demand snapshot-compaction` when `snapshot compaction` is already about to get triggered ... main motive of `on-demand snapshot-compaction` is operator don't want to wait for `event-threshold` to reach. Anyway, for the scenario you have describe, one of the compaction job won't run, Isn't this a correct behaviour ?

>  unless you ensure you run on-demand snapshot compaction also as a job like the regular compaction-snapshot job.

here, we are not changing any behaviour of `snapshot compaction` feature. so, yes `on-demand snapshot compaction` will also be run as `compaction job`. 

> t0: no compaction job running; (ondemand snapshot is triggered)

did you mean `ondemand compaction` ? If yes then only 1 `snapshot compaction` job will be triggered.

Reviewer: Let me rephrase the ask may be that's simpler to explain. 
> There should not be a `on-demand snapshot-compaction` task already running for the same etcd cluster.

How are you ensuring this given that we have 2 actors now:
1. Regular Snapshot Compaction Job 
2. OnDemand Compaction 

Why do you say it can never lead to race condition.

Reviewer: >yes, that's correct but why you want to run on demand snapshot-compaction when snapshot compaction is already about to get triggered .

But the operator will not know about this or will he? 
You should consider the fact that this can be used by anyone who has the access and might not be aware that there is a job running or the job might not be aware that there is a compaction executed onDemand. 

I've got to understand that we should avoid 2 actors and have deterministic behavior from @unmarshall, so I was wondering if this guiding principle is voilated here. 

If you think that's not the case, then its fine we can close this remark.

Author: as you already mentioned in the comment https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757#discussion_r1550948932 that compaction feature already has a capability to detect old job before initiating a new one then we are fine as we are not changing any behaviour of snapshot compaction feature.
Here, out-of-band task controller will act just as an orchestrator to trigger the `snapshot compaction feature`. IMO, this edge case won't cause any un-deterministic behaviour as `snapshot compaction feature` checking this.

https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/637da10c12b8df72e46532e04a0fd4768ced60d9/controllers/compaction/reconciler.go#L123-L124

> 

Reviewer 3: Also, I can think of one more pre-condition, if the `on-demand maintenance` has been triggered some time before this task is triggered, can we reject this by having a threshold for the time before which the maintenance has been completed? As the maintenance triggers `etcdctl` compaction & defrag, then we can just do a `on-demand full` after that and can reject this `on-demand compaction`. I guess compaction is a heavy work unlike `on-demand delta/full` so I feel we can reject this whenever we can.

If this is already discussed but just not documented here, then sorry for bringing in the details in this revision :(

Author: Now, understand this scenario: 
Etcd db size spikes -> operator triggers the `on-demand maintenance` -> etcd db size come down -> they ping us to check why db size spiked ?
Now, to study all the events, we have our delta snapshots, now by invoking task `on-demand snapshot-compaction` with disabling defrag and compact, it will apply all the delta-snapshots on etcd cluster and can study all the db size spike ... which we already discussed `Build tool to analyse delta snapshot contents`.
So, IMO these are independent task let it be independents

Reviewer 3: Makes sense. I Didn't quite think about the troubleshooting aspect of this. For the current revision we can go with this, but if at some point we discover some ordering of tasks, we can improve it anytime later. Thanks.

> 

Reviewer 2: Semantically you are right. You can only order the tasks if there are more than one queued tasks at the time you decide to pick up one for processing. If you have picked up one for processing and then the other task comes in which ideally should be executed first (only for optimisation reason) then the pre-condition would pass for the in-flight task because the other task got queued only after executing the pre-condition checks which would happen in micro/milli seconds.

So if you are trying to use a priority queue then you must assign relative priorities to tasks. This is different from a pre-condition which is only evaluated when a task is picked up for execution. It is a guard to allow or reject a task.

> 

Reviewer 4: From what I understand, the proposal currently only proposes a FIFO method of acting on existing tasks and states dependent ordering will only be addressed later, so this would be out of scope of this proposal currently, unless we plan on expanding the proposal to define these as well now. This comes under dependent ordering, I presume?

> 

Reviewer 3: > if you are trying to use a priority queue then you must assign relative priorities to tasks.

Yeah I meant to give priority to tasks but after looking at the response from Ishan about why ordering is not that helpful and not necessary at times, this can be parked for later if at all the need arises. Thanks

* A on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot
SnapshotType string `json:"snapshotType"`
const (
  FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
  DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"
)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  SnapshotType snapshotType `json:"snapshotType"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

* Etcd cluster should have a quorum.
* There should not already be a `on-demand snapshot` task running with the same `SnapshotType` for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster

Operator can trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster which includes operations like [etcd compaction](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/op-guide/maintenance/#history-compaction-v3-api-key-value-database), [etcd defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) etc.

> 

Reviewer 3: Does this also perform the `on-demand full` after the `compact` & `defrag`, if not then it would be better to include that as then we don't have to run `on-demand compaction` for some time after this.

Author: > Does this also perform the on-demand full after the compact & defrag,

As the task name suggest `on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster`, it just orchestrate the maintenance of cluster out of maintenance window, it doesn't trigger the `on-demand full snapshot`. `out-of-band` task should do what its required to do, nothing more than that.

>if not then it would be better to include that as then we don't have to run on-demand compaction for some time after this

Main reason of introducing `on-demand snapshot compaction` is it will run as a separate job without affecting or depending on health of etcd cluster.
Now, if some operator is invoking the `on-demand maintenance` task, it means that etcd cluster is already heavily loaded and now, we are saying after `maintenance`, also take full-snapshot which will also cause more load on running etcd cluster. I'm not in favour of that.
However, still somebody wants to take full-snapshot after `on-demand maintenance` then he/she can invoke `on-demand snapshot` task to take it

Reviewer 3: I agree with your POV of load on the cluster. Whatever I said only made sense for me because of this [comment](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757#discussion_r1552933574). These both were supposed to go hand-in-hand. But now that you detailed on why the tasks need to be separate so as to study the reason for certain events, I'm also in favour of having tasks independent, as there is no need to complicate things. Thanks for explaining.

## Terminology

* **druid:** [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) is an operator to manage the etcd clusters.

* **backup-sidecar:** It is the etcd-backup-restore sidecar container running in each etcd-member pod of etcd cluster.

* **leading-backup-sidecar:** A backup-sidecar that is associated to an etcd leader of an etcd cluster.

* **out-of-band task** Any on-demand tasks/operations that can be executed on an etcd cluster without modifying the Etcd custom resource spec (desired state).

## Motivation

Today, [Etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) mainly acts as an etcd cluster provisioner(creation, maintenance and deletion). In future, capabilities of etcd-druid will be enhanced via [etcd-member](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/8ac70d512969c2e12e666d923d7d35fdab1e0f8e/docs/proposals/04-etcd-member-custom-resource.md) proposal by providing it access to a much more detailed information about each etcd cluster member. While we enhance the reconciliation and monitoring capabilities of etcd-druid, it still lacks an ability to provide an easy-to-use handle for an operator to trigger `out-of-band` tasks on an existing etcd cluster.

> There are new learnings while operating etcd clusters at scale. It has been observed that we regularly need capabilities to trigger `out-of-band` tasks which are out of the purview of a regular reconciliation run. Replacing manual intervention by an operator to invoke any `out-of-band` tasks, thus alleviating any mistakes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are new learnings while operating etcd clusters at scale. It has been observed that we regularly need capabilities to trigger `out-of-band` tasks which are out of the purview of a regular etcd cluster reconciliation run. Many of these tasks are a multi-step process and doing it manually is error-prone even if an operator follows a well-written step-by-step guide. Thus there is a need to automate these tasks to alleviate mistakes.
```

Some examples of an `on-demand/out-of-band` operations:

* Recover from a permament quorum loss.
* Trigger an on-demand full/delta snapshot.
* Trigger an on-demand snapshot compaction.
* Trigger an on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster.
* Copy the backups from one object store to another object store.

> * Inspect full/delta snapshots to gauge DB size growth and identify potential hot-spots.

Reviewer 2: we can remove this. I thought about it a bit more and this does not fit into the task framework but it surely can be provided as a `druidctl` sub-command. The reason is that the result of such an activity could result in a LOT of data and we should not store this as part of the task status.

Author: make sense

        description: <description of the error>
        lastUpdateTime: <time the error was reported>
    lastOperation:
      name: <operation-name>
      state: <task state as seen at the completion of last operation>
      lastTransitionTime: <time of transition to this state>
      reason: <reason/message if any>
    conditions:
      - type: <type of condition>
        status: <status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown>
        lastTransitionTime: <last time the condition transitioned from one status to another>
        reason: <programmatic identifier indicating the reason for the condition's last transition>
        message: <human readable message indicating details about the transition>
```

> NOTE: The above custom resource YAML serves as a template which will be used to further create a CRD and Golang APIs.

### Golang API

```go
// EtcdOperatorTask represents an out-of-band operator task.
type EtcdOperatorTask struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta
  metav1.ObjectMeta

  // Spec is the specification of the task.
  Spec EtcdOperatorTaskSpec
  // Status is most recently observed status of the task.
  Status EtcdOperatorTaskStatus
}
```

#### Spec

> The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the spec (desired state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: Do you really need this paragraph. The comments repeat what you mention here in the list.

* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.taskConfig` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102). The controller (for instance `operator-task-controller`) needs to parse this data, which comes as a RawExtension, according to the schema defined for each task.
* To garbage collect the custom resource after completion of task a `Time-to-live` field should be defined.

```go
// EtcdOperatorTaskSpec is the spec for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskSpec struct {
  
  // Type is a field that specifies the type of out-of-band operator task to be performed. 
  // It can have values of all supported operations/tasks type eg. "OnDemandSnapshotTask" etc.
  Type string `json:"taskType"`

  // Config is a task specific configuration.
  Config *runtime.RawExtension `json:"taskConfig,omitempty"`

  // TTLSecondsAfterFinished is the time-to-live after which the task and 
  // related resources will be garbage collected.
  // +optional
  TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Status

> The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the `Status` (current state) of the EtcdOperatorTask custom resource as the custom resource's `Status` will be used to monitor the progress of the task.

Reviewer 2: Do you need this description para since the doc strings on the golang code already provides this information.

Author: same as https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757#discussion_r1542466383

  // Status of the last operation
  Status TaskState `json:"taskStatus"`
  // Time at which operation is been triggered.
  InitiatedAt metav1.Time `json:"initiatedAt"`
  // LastError represents the errors when processing the task.
  LastErrors []LastError `json:"lastErrors,omitempty"`
  // Captures the last operation
  // +optional
  LastOperation *LastOperation `json:"lastOperation,omitempty"`
  // Conditions represents the latest available observations of an object's current state.
  // +optional
  Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}

type LastOperation struct {
  // Name of the LastOperation.
  Name opsName `json:"name"`
  // Status of the last operation, one of pending, progress, completed, failed.
  State OperationState `json:"state"`
  // Last time the operation state transitioned from one to another.
  LastTransitionTime metav1.Time `json:"lastTransitionTime"`
  // A human readable message indicating details about the last operation.
  Reason string `json:"reason"`
}

```

### Lifecycle

#### Creation

Task(s) can be created by creating an instance of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource specific to a task.

> > Note: For future improvements, a creation of an instance of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource can be done via CLI wrapper.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: In future, either a `kubectl` extension plugin or a `druidctl` will be introduced. Dedicated sub-commands will be created for each `out-of-band` task. This will drastically increase the usability for an operator for such tasks as the CLI extension will automatically created relevant instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` with the provided configuration.
```

#### Execution

* Authors propose to introduce a new controller (let's call it `operator-task-controller`) which watches for `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource specific to a task defined by [.spec.taskType](#spec).

> * All tasks have to adhere some prerequisites(a.k.a `pre-conditions`) which will be necessary to execute the task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* All tasks have to adhere to some prerequisites(a.k.a `pre-conditions`) which will be necessary to execute the task.
```

> * Authors propose to define pre-conditions for each task, which must be met for the task to be executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Authors propose to define pre-conditions for each task, which must be met for the task to be eligible for execution.
```

* If multiple tasks are invoked simultaneously or in `pending` state, then they will be executed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner.

> Note: Dependent ordering among tasks will be addresed later which may enable concurrent execution of tasks.

#### Deletion

> `Etcd-druid` will ensure that it garbage collects the custom resources and any other k8s resources created to realise the task as per `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` defined (or default time) in the [spec](#spec) of custom resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Etcd-druid` will ensure that it garbage collects the custom resources and any other k8s resources created to realise the task as per `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec) or it assumes a default expiry time.
```

### Use Cases

#### Recovery from permanent quorum loss

> Currently identification and recovery from permament quorum loss is done manaually. The current proposal keeps the identification as manual, requiring an human operator to intervene and confirm that there is indeed a permanent quorum loss and automatic recovery is not possible. Once that is established then the authors now wish to automate the recovery which is currently a [multi-step process](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/operations/recovery-from-permanent-quorum-loss-in-etcd-cluster.md) and needs to be done carefully. Automation would ensure that we eliminate any errors from an operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently identification and recovery from permament quorum loss is done manaually. The current proposal keeps the identification as manual, requiring an human operator to intervene and confirm that there is indeed a permanent quorum loss with no auto healing possibility. Once that is established then the next step to recover the cluster is now proposed to be automated. Recovery today is a [multi-step process](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/operations/recovery-from-permanent-quorum-loss-in-etcd-cluster.md) and needs to be done carefully. Automation would ensure that we eliminate any errors from an operator.
```

##### Task Config

We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should be a quorum loss in a multi-member etcd cluster. For a single-member etcd cluster, invoking this task is unnecessary as the restoration of the single member is automatically handled by the backup-restore process.
* There should not already be a permanent-quorum-loss-recovery-task running for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand snapshot compaction

`etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags). If and when this threshold is breached then only a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction is required.

##### Possible scenarios

> * Full snapshot taken via compaction job is better as compared to full snapshot taken directly from etcd cluster as full snapshot taken via snapshot compaction is taken after [defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) called on etcd, hence this full snapshot is much more compacted, hence less in size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Full snapshot taken via compaction job is better as compared to full snapshot taken directly from etcd cluster as full snapshot taken via snapshot compaction is taken after [defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) which makes it smaller (more compacted) in size.
```

> * Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but full snapshot taken by compaction job is developed separately with zero effect on running cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but full snapshot taken by compaction job is done separately with zero effect on the running cluster.
```

Author: I would like to stick with `developed` word here as it make more sense since snapshot compaction is multi-step process then only a full snapshot is taken, hence I went with word `developed`.

Reviewer 2: `developed` is an incorrect word choice here. What you wish to say here is compaction job is `deployed` or `executed` in a dedicated pod started when a k8s `Job` is scheduled.  There is nothing `developed` separately.

Author: > There is nothing developed separately.

`developed` is used in context of full snapshot taken by compaction sub-command which starts embedded etcd and so on ... so, IMO it's `develop`. I can re-phrase the whole sentence with something like this:

> Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but the full snapshot taken by the compaction job is designed to run separately, thereby having no impact on the operational cluster.

Reviewer 2: then instead of `developed` it should be `created`. But your rephrase is better and you can stick to that as that is much more clearer.

##### Task Config

We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not be a `on-demand snapshot-compaction` task already running for the same etcd cluster.

> * Other than that, it has no pre-conditions as `on-demand snapshot-compaction` runs as a separate job in a seprate pod, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.

Reviewer 2: Bullet points are meant for specifying pre-conditions but this point is not a pre-condition. You can just add it as a `NOTE` after the pre-conditions are listed.

```suggestion
> NOTE: `on-demand snapshot-compaction` runs as a separate job in a separate pod, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.
```

#### Trigger on-demand full/delta snapshot

`Etcd` custom resource provides an ability to set [FullSnapshotSchedule](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L158) which is currently defauled to run once in 24 hrs. [DeltaSnapshotPeriod](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L171) is also made configurable which defines the duration after which a delta snapshot will be taken.

> If operator don't want to wait for schedule full/delta snapshot, operator can trigger a on-demand(out-of-schedule) full/delta snapshot on etcd cluster which will be taken by `leading-backup-restore`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If operator does not wish to wait for the scheduled full/delta snapshot, he/she can trigger an on-demand(out-of-schedule) full/delta snapshot on etcd cluster which will be taken by `leading-backup-restore`.
```

* A on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot
SnapshotType string `json:"snapshotType"`
const (
  FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
  DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"
)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  SnapshotType snapshotType `json:"snapshotType"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

* Etcd cluster should have a quorum.
* There should not already be a `on-demand snapshot` task running with the same `SnapshotType` for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster

Operator can trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster which includes operations like [etcd compaction](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/op-guide/maintenance/#history-compaction-v3-api-key-value-database), [etcd defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) etc.

##### Possible Scenarios

> * If etcd cluster is heavily loaded which is causing performance degradation of etcd cluster, and operator doesn't want to wait for schedule maintenance window then operator can trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster which internally calls the operations etcd-compaction, etcd-defragmentation etc. which will make etcd cluster lean and clean, therefore improves cluster performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If an etcd cluster is heavily loaded which is causing performance degradation of an etcd cluster and the operator does not want to wait for the scheduled maintenance window then an on-demand maintenance task can be triggered which will invoke etcd-compaction, etcd-defragmentation etc. on the target etcd cluster. This will make etcd cluster lean and clean, thus improving cluster performance.
```

  EtcdDefragmentation *bool `json:"defragmentation,omitempty"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

* Etcd cluster should have a quorum.
* There should not already be a duplicate task running with same `maintenanceType`.

#### Copy the backups from one object store to another object store

##### Task Config

```go
// EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig defines the parameters for the copy backups task.
type EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig struct {
  // SourceStore defines the specification of the source object store provider.
  SourceStore StoreSpec `json:"sourceStore"`

  // TargetStore defines the specification of the target object store provider for storing backups.
  TargetStore StoreSpec `json:"targetStore"`

  // MaxBackupAge is the maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied.
  // By default all backups will be copied.
  // +optional
  MaxBackupAge *uint32 `json:"maxBackupAge,omitempty"`

  // MaxBackups is the maximum number of backups that will be copied starting with the most recent ones.
  // +optional
  MaxBackups *uint32 `json:"maxBackups,omitempty"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not already be a duplicate task running.

> * It has no other pre-conditions as `copy-backup-task` runs as a seprate job, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.

Reviewer 2: same as the above comment. Since this point is not a pre-condition it should be listed as one. See the above comment which has proposed changes.

Author: done

There are new learnings while operating etcd clusters at scale. It has been observed that we regularly need capabilities to trigger `out-of-band` tasks which are out of the purview of a regular etcd reconciliation run. Many of these tasks are a multi-step process and doing it manually is error-prone even if an operator follows a well-written step-by-step guide. Thus there is a need to automate these tasks to alleviate mistakes.
Some examples of an `on-demand/out-of-band` operations:

* Recover from a permament quorum loss.
* Trigger an on-demand full/delta snapshot.
* Trigger an on-demand snapshot compaction.
* Trigger an on-demand [maintenance of etcd cluster](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/op-guide/maintenance/).
* Copy the backups from one object store to another object store.

## Goals

* Establish an unified interface for operator tasks by defining a single dedicated custom resource for `out-of-band` tasks.

> * Define a contract (in terms of prerequisites) which needs to be adhered to by any task.

Reviewer 2: I would perhaps just use `Define a contract ( in terms of prerequisites) which needs to be adhered to by any task implementation.`

> * Define a contract (in terms of prerequisites) which needs to be adhered to by any task.

Author: > the agent performing such tasks.

the `agent` is not correct term here. example `on-demand full snapshot` in this task agent is leading backup-restore which takes the full snapshot but backup-restore can't check the pre-conditions, so the contract a.k.a pre-conditions need to be checked by the orchestrator not by agent.

## Non-Goals
* In the current scope, capability to abort/cancel an out-of-band task is not going to be provided. This could be considered as an enhancement based on pull.
* Ordering (by establishing dependency) of out-of-band tasks submitted for the same etcd cluster is not been considered in the first increment. In a future version based on how operator tasks are used we will enhance this proposal and the implementation.

## Proposal

Authors propose creation of a new single dedicated custom resource to represent an `out-of-band` task. Druid will be enhanced to process the task requests and update its status which can then be tracked/observed.

### API

`ETCDOperatorTask` is the new custom resource that will be introduced. This API will be in `v1alpha1` version and will be subject to change. We will be respecting [Kubernetes Deprecation Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/).

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: EtcdOperatorTask
metadata:
    name: <name of operator task resource>
    namespace: <cluster namespace>
    generation: <specific generation of the desired state>
spec:

>     taskType: <type/category of supported out-of-band task>

Reviewer 2: This has already been changed in the golang API. We will go through the doc and streamline these things.

    ttlSecondsAfterFinished: <time-to-live to garbage collect the custom resource>

>     taskConfig: <task specific configuration>

Reviewer 2: I think in many parts we have replaced `taskConfig` with `config`. This is the place it was left over.

status:
    observedGeneration: <specific observedGeneration of the resource>
    taskStatus: < overall status of the task >
    initiatedAt: <time of intiation of this operation>
    lastErrors:
      - code: <error-code>
        description: <description of the error>

>         lastUpdateTime: <time the error was reported>

Author: updated to `observedAt`
```
    lastErrors:
    - code: <error-code>
      description: <description of the error>
      observedAt: <time the error was observed>
```

    lastOperation:
      name: <operation-name>
      state: <task state as seen at the completion of last operation>
      lastTransitionTime: <time of transition to this state>
      reason: <reason/message if any>
    conditions:
      - type: <type of condition>
        status: <status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown>
        lastTransitionTime: <last time the condition transitioned from one status to another>
        reason: <programmatic identifier indicating the reason for the condition's last transition>

>         message: <human readable message indicating details about the transition>

Author: @unmarshall and I decided to remove the `conditions` for now as `conditions` were already optional field, not every task required it.

```

> NOTE: The above custom resource YAML serves as a template which will be used to further create a CRD and Golang APIs.

### Golang API

```go
// EtcdOperatorTask represents an out-of-band operator task.
type EtcdOperatorTask struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta
  metav1.ObjectMeta

  // Spec is the specification of the task.
  Spec EtcdOperatorTaskSpec
  // Status is most recently observed status of the task.
  Status EtcdOperatorTaskStatus
}
```

> #### Spec

Reviewer 2: In the member proposal, we took a different approach. Each section added a specific section to the `EtcdMember.Status` and we went about explaining why that was needed and what needs to be recorded for that functionality. This was required because we try to capture lot of things as part of the `Status`. Also in the member proposal we have not given any golang API. In this proposal the CRD is pretty small and simple so we really does not make much of a difference actually. YAML presents a CRD template and then comes the golang API.

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the spec (desired state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

> * To capture the type of `out-of-band` operator task to be performed, `spec.Type` field should be defined. It can have values from any supported "out-of-band" operations/tasks eg. "OnDemandSnaphotTask", "QuorumLossRecoveryTask" etc.

Author: no, I don't want examples to be written in this format `examples`

* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `spec.Config` field is defined of type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102) as each task can have different input configuration.

```go
// EtcdOperatorTaskSpec is the spec for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskSpec struct {
  
  // Type specifies the type of out-of-band operator task to be performed. 

>   Type string `json:"taskType"`

Reviewer 2: Validation reason is not strong as you could still have a slice of string and call it `supportedTaskTypes` and then check if the one passed is one among them and then you really do not need to define a type alias.

>   Type string `json:"taskType"`

Reviewer 4: You're right that validation by checking if the input string is `==` a member in the supported types would have be done even if a custom type is defined.
Thanks for the clarification. We can take a call during implementation.

  // Config is a task specific configuration.
  Config *runtime.RawExtension `json:"taskConfig,omitempty"`

  // TTLSecondsAfterFinished is the time-to-live after which the task and 
  // related resources will be garbage collected.
  // +optional

>   TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: `AfterFinished` does not say anything about `Success`. `Finished` or `Completed` are agnostic to the type of result (Success, Failure or Rejection).

>   TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`

Author: updated

}
```

#### Status

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the `Status` (current state) of the EtcdOperatorTask custom resource as the custom resource's `Status` will be used to monitor the progress of the task.

* To capture the Status of a task, a field `taskStatus` is defined in status.

> * If operation involves many stages, so to capture the status of intermediate or any stage, `.status.lastOperation` will be useful.

Author: > will be useful in capturing the status of intermediate steps.

In the first half of sentence we are using the term `stages`, in 2nd half of sentence you are suggesting the word `steps `, I would like to stick to the word `stages`.

```go
// TaskState represents the state of the task.
type TaskState string

const (
  Failed TaskState = "failed"
  Pending TaskState = "pending"
  Rejected TaskState = "rejected"
  Completed TaskState = "completed"
  InProgress TaskState = "inProgress"
)

// EtcdOperatorTaskStatus is the status for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskStatus struct {
  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for the resource.
  ObservedGeneration *int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  // State of the task is the last known state of the task.
  State TaskState `json:"taskStatus"`
  // Time at which operation has been triggered.

>   InitiatedAt metav1.Time `json:"initiatedAt"`

Reviewer 5: Same as above. Also, What exactly does `Time at which operation has been triggered` mean? Is it the same as creationTimestamp of the CR? Or is it the time at which druid picked up the resource for actuation? Or something else entirely? This seems ambiguous to me right now.

#### Execution

* Authors propose to introduce a new controller (let's call it `operator-task-controller`) which watches for `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource specific to a task defined by [.spec.taskType](#spec).
* Each `out-of-band` task may have some task specific configuration defined in [.spec.taskConfig](#spec).
* The controller (`operator-task-controller`) needs to parse this task specific config, which comes as a RawExtension, according to the schema defined for each task.
* Moreover, all tasks have to adhere to some prerequisites(a.k.a `pre-conditions`) which will be necessary to execute the task. Authors propose to define pre-conditions for each task, which must be met for the task to be eligible for execution otherwise that task should be rejected.
* If multiple tasks are invoked simultaneously or in `pending` state, then they will be executed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner.

> Note: Dependent ordering among tasks will be addresed later which may enable concurrent execution of tasks.

#### Deletion

> `Etcd-druid` will ensure that it garbage collects the custom resources and any other k8s resources created to realise the task as per `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec) or it assumes a default expiry time.

Author: done

> `Etcd-druid` will ensure that it garbage collects the custom resources and any other k8s resources created to realise the task as per `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec) or it assumes a default expiry time.

Reviewer 4: Was addressed.

### Use Cases

#### Recovery from permanent quorum loss

Currently identification and recovery from permament quorum loss is done manaually. The current proposal keeps the identification as manual, requiring an human operator to intervene and confirm that there is indeed a permanent quorum loss with no auto healing possibility. Once that is established then the next step to recover the cluster is now proposed to be automated. Recovery today is a [multi-step process](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/operations/recovery-from-permanent-quorum-loss-in-etcd-cluster.md) and needs to be done carefully. Automation would ensure that we eliminate any errors from an operator.

##### Task Config

We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

##### Pre-Conditions

> * There should be a quorum loss in a multi-member etcd cluster. For a single-member etcd cluster, invoking this task is unnecessary as the restoration of the single member is automatically handled by the backup-restore process.

Author: no, It will get `rejected` for a single node etcd cluster

* There should not already be a permanent-quorum-loss-recovery-task running for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand snapshot compaction

> `etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags). If and when this threshold is breached then only a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction is required.

Reviewer 4: nit: add the word flag while describing `etcd-event-threshold`.
```suggestion
`etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags) flag. If and when this threshold is breached then only a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction is required.
```

##### Possible scenarios

* Full snapshot taken via compaction job is better as compared to full snapshot taken directly from etcd cluster as full snapshot taken via snapshot compaction is taken after [defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) which makes it smaller (more compacted) in size.

> * Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but full snapshot taken by compaction job is developed separately with zero effect on the running cluster.

Author: addressed, PTAL

##### Task Config

> We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

Reviewer 4: Same as https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757#discussion_r1555546954

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not be a `on-demand snapshot-compaction` task already running for the same etcd cluster.

> >Note: `on-demand snapshot-compaction` runs as a separate job in a seprate pod, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
>Note: `on-demand snapshot-compaction` runs as a separate job in a separate pod, hence it doesn't depend on the health of the etcd cluster members, or any other conditions.
```

#### Trigger on-demand full/delta snapshot

> `Etcd` custom resource provides an ability to set [FullSnapshotSchedule](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L158) which is currently defauled to run once in 24 hrs. [DeltaSnapshotPeriod](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L171) is also made configurable which defines the duration after which a delta snapshot will be taken.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`Etcd` custom resource provides an ability to set [FullSnapshotSchedule](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L158) which is currently defaulted to run once in 24 hrs. [DeltaSnapshotPeriod](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/api/v1alpha1/types_etcd.go#L171) is also made configurable which defines the duration after which a delta snapshot will be taken.
```

If operator does not wish to wait for the scheduled full/delta snapshot, he/she can trigger an on-demand(out-of-schedule) full/delta snapshot on etcd cluster which will be taken by `leading-backup-restore`.

##### Possible scenarios

> * [Shoot hibernation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_hibernate.md): Every etcd cluster incurs an inherent cost of preserving the volumes even when the shoot is in hibernation state. However it is possible to save costs by invoking this task to take a full snapshot before deleting the volumes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [Shoot hibernation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_hibernate.md): Every etcd cluster incurs an inherent cost of preserving the volumes even when the shoot is in hibernation state. However, it is possible to save costs by invoking this task to take a full snapshot before deleting the volumes.
```

* [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener) a seed cluster control plane can be moved to another seed cluster. To prevent data loss and faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed, a full snapshot can be triggered for the etcd cluster in the source seed.

> * A on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* An on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.
```

Can you make this the first point? I feel this is more common for community users who use only etcd-druid and not gardener.

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot

> SnapshotType string `json:"snapshotType"`

Reviewer 4: Isn't this statement supposed to define a type? Aren't JSON tags for fields of a struct?
Shouldn't it be:
```suggestion
type SnapshotType string
```

Reviewer 4: This has been fixed in one of the newer commits.

const (
  FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
  DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"
)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.

>   SnapshotType snapshotType `json:"snapshotType"`

Reviewer 4: The type should be `SnapshotType` and the field should be `snapshotType`.

```suggestion
  snapshotType SnapshotType `json:"snapshotType"`
```

Reviewer 4: Was addressed in one of the newer commits.

}

> ```

Reviewer 5: It would have been nicer to have the YAML for the config instead of the go code, since the YAML structure is easily readable.

Author: addressed, PTAL

##### Pre-Conditions

* Etcd cluster should have a quorum.
* There should not already be a `on-demand snapshot` task running with the same `SnapshotType` for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster

Operator can trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster which includes operations like [etcd compaction](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/op-guide/maintenance/#history-compaction-v3-api-key-value-database), [etcd defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) etc.

##### Possible Scenarios

* If an etcd cluster is heavily loaded which is causing performance degradation of an etcd cluster and the operator does not want to wait for the scheduled maintenance window then an on-demand maintenance task can be triggered which will invoke etcd-compaction, etcd-defragmentation etc. on the target etcd cluster. This will make etcd cluster lean and clean, thus improving cluster performance.

##### Task Config

```go
type OnDemandMaintenanceTaskConfig struct {
  // MaintenanceType defines the maintenance operations need to be performed on etcd cluster.
  MaintenanceType maintenanceOps
}

type maintenanceOps struct {

>   EtcdCompaction *bool `json:"etcd-compaction,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Even though the fields are self explanatory, for consistency's sake it would be nicer to have a comment describing each field, like there is for every other struct definition.

  EtcdDefragmentation *bool `json:"defragmentation,omitempty"`
}

> ```

Reviewer 5: Again, please include the YAML structure here rather than the go code.

##### Pre-Conditions

* Etcd cluster should have a quorum.
* There should not already be a duplicate task running with same `maintenanceType`.

#### Copy the backups from one object store to another object store

> 

Reviewer 5: Please add some information about this task, like all the other tasks.

Author: done

##### Task Config

```go
// EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig defines the parameters for the copy backups task.
type EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig struct {
  // SourceStore defines the specification of the source object store provider.
  SourceStore StoreSpec `json:"sourceStore"`

  // TargetStore defines the specification of the target object store provider for storing backups.
  TargetStore StoreSpec `json:"targetStore"`

  // MaxBackupAge is the maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied.
  // By default all backups will be copied.
  // +optional
  MaxBackupAge *uint32 `json:"maxBackupAge,omitempty"`

  // MaxBackups is the maximum number of backups that will be copied starting with the most recent ones.
  // +optional
  MaxBackups *uint32 `json:"maxBackups,omitempty"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

> * There should not already be a duplicate task running.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* There should not already be an `copy-backups` task running.
```

> > Note: `copy-backup-task` runs as a seprate job, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> Note: `copy-backup-task` runs as a separate job, hence it doesn't depend on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.
```

> > Note: `copy-backup-task` runs as a seprate job, hence it doesn't depends on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> Note: `copy-backup-task` runs as a separate job, and operates only on the backup bucket, hence it doesn't depend on health of etcd cluster members.
```

> > Note: CopyBackupTask has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but CopyBackupTask can be harmonize with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 4: For the sake of correctness - `EtcdCopyBackupsTask`.

```suggestion
> Note: `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` has already been implemented, and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` can be harmonized with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.
```

> > Note: CopyBackupTask has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but CopyBackupTask can be harmonize with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 5: Does this mean we need to deprecate the `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` resource in favour of the harmonized `EtcdOperatorTask` resource? If so, how do we plan to do this? If not, would druid need to support both ways of invoking a copy-backups task?

Author: I think we need to deprecate the old way of invoking the `EtcdCopyBackupsTask` but at some of time we need to support both ways as CPM code flow also need to be adjust accordingly.

## Metrics

Authors proposed to introduce the following metrics:

* `etcd_operator_task_duration_seconds` : Histogram which captures the runtime for each etcd operator task.

>   Labels:

Reviewer 5: An important label missing is the `etcd` which indicates the etcd resource itself.

Author: added

  * Key : `type`, Value: task type
  * Key: `state` Value: One-Of {failed, success, rejected}
* `etcd_operator_tasks_total`: Counter which counts the number of etcd operator tasks.
  Labels:
  * Key : `type`, Value: task type

>   * Key: `state` Value: One-Of {failed, success, rejected}

Reviewer 5: Same as above.

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should be a quorum loss in a multi-member etcd cluster. For a single-member etcd cluster, invoking this task is unnecessary as the restoration of the single member is automatically handled by the backup-restore process.
* There should not already be a permanent-quorum-loss-recovery-task running for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand snapshot compaction

`Etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags) flag. When this threshold is breached, then a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for the etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction may be required.

##### Possible scenarios

* Full snapshot taken via compaction job is better as compared to full snapshot taken directly from etcd cluster as full snapshot taken via snapshot compaction is taken after [defragmentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/#defragmentation) which makes it smaller (more compacted) in size.

> * Full snapshot triggered on etcd cluster might cause load on running etcd cluster but the full snapshot taken by the compaction job is designed to run separately, thereby having no impact on the operational cluster.

Reviewer 4: The points mentioned here aren't really *possible scenarios* in which an out-of-band snapshot compaction would be useful. They explain what an out-of-band snapshot compaction would do, and why they would be useful. "Why" is explained, but "Where" isn't.
This section could either be moved out of possible scenarios, or more cases where an out-of-band snapshot compaction would be useful can be written.

Author: agreed, I have now removed these points and added a new points.

Reviewer 4: The snapshot integrity verification is a great scenario. Thanks!

##### Possible scenarios

* An on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.
* [Gardener Shoot Hibernation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_hibernate.md): Every etcd cluster incurs an inherent cost of preserving the volumes even when a gardener shoot control plane is scaled down, i.e the shoot is in a hibernated state. However, it is possible to save on hyperscaler costs by invoking this task to take a full snapshot before scaling down the etcd cluster, and deleting the etcd data volumes afterwards.
* [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener), a seed cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.

> , a seed cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.

Reviewer 4: Line 277 is already mentioned in 275.
```suggestion
```

##### Task Config

```go
// EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig defines the parameters for the copy backups task.
type EtcdCopyBackupsTaskConfig struct {
  // SourceStore defines the specification of the source object store provider.
  SourceStore StoreSpec `json:"sourceStore"`

  // TargetStore defines the specification of the target object store provider for storing backups.
  TargetStore StoreSpec `json:"targetStore"`

  // MaxBackupAge is the maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied.
  // By default all backups will be copied.
  // +optional
  MaxBackupAge *uint32 `json:"maxBackupAge,omitempty"`

  // MaxBackups is the maximum number of backups that will be copied starting with the most recent ones.
  // +optional
  MaxBackups *uint32 `json:"maxBackups,omitempty"`
}
```

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not already be a `copy-backups` task running.

> Note: `copy-backups-task` runs as a separate job, and it operates only on the backup bucket, hence it doesn't depend on health of etcd cluster members.

> > Note: `copy-backups-task` has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `copy-backups-task` can be harmonize with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> Note: `copy-backups-task` has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `copy-backups-task` can be harmonized with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.
```

* **on-demand**: Refers to any task or operation that is performed outside of the regular schedule.

## Motivation

[Etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) mainly acts as an etcd cluster provisioner(creation, maintenance and deletion), but sometimes operator wants to perform some on-demand operations on etcd cluster. These operations, which can be executed on-demand, are referred to as "out-of-band" operations/tasks. Operations that have nothing to do with the desired state of the etcd cluster.
Today, these "out-of-band" task, operator have to perform via different methods like manual, or via some other ways, but there is no single standard interface available for operator to use that for these "out-of-band" operator task
This proposal proposes a unified framework to perform operator's `out-of-band` operations/tasks on etcd cluster.

Examples of various "out-of-band" operator task are following:

* Recovery from permanent quorum loss.
* Trigger on-demand full/delta snapshots.
* Trigger on-demand snapshot compaction.
* Trigger on-demand maintenance of etcd cluster.
* Copy the backups from one object store to another object store.

## Definition of "out-of-band" task

> "out-of-band" task refer to any on-demand tasks/operations that can be executed on an etcd cluster without modifying the Etcd custom resource spec (desired state).

Reviewer 2: This can go into `Terminology`

## Goals

* Establish a unified interface for operators to initiate any "out-of-band" operator task at their convenience and monitor their status.
* Facilitate the easy addition of new "out-of-band" task through this framework.

> ### Concrete Use Cases

Reviewer 2: As discussed. Start make some structural changes to the overall document. 
Proposal:
- API
  - Custom Resource Object
  - Golang API
- Lifecycle
  - Creation
  - Execution
    - Pre-Condition or acceptance criteria for a task
    - Sequencing of task execution
  - Deletion
- Use Cases
  - <Use Case 1>
    - Describe the use case
    - List scenario where this task is going to be used.
    - Define the API
    - Define the pre-conditions

Remove the following sections:
- 1 custom resource vs n custom resources    
- 1 contoller vs n-controller

Replace `Graduation Criteria` with feature gates.

- To capture the type of "out-of-band" operator task to be performed, `taskType` field is defined in spec. It can have values of all supported "out-of-band" operations/tasks eg. "OnDemandSnaphotTask", "QuorumLossRecoveryTask" etc.
- To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `taskConfig` field is defined in spec as type [RawExtension](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L49-L102). The controller (for instance, the EtcdOperatorTasks Controller) needs to parse this data, which comes as a RawExtension, according to the schema defined for each task.
- `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` defines a `Time-to-live` to garbage collect the custom resource after completion of task.

```go
// EtcdOperatorTasksSpec is the spec for a EtcdOperatorTasks resource.
type EtcdOperatorTasksSpec struct {

  // TaskType is a field that specifies the type of out-of-band operator task to be performed. 
  // It can have values of all supported operation/task type eg. "OnDemandSnapshotTask" etc.

>   TaskType *string `json:"taskType"`

Reviewer 2: Rename this to `Type`

  // TTLSecondsAfterFinished define time-to-libe to garbage collect the custom resource after completion of task. 
  TTLSecondsAfterFinished  int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished"`

  // TaskConfig is a task specific configuration.

>   TaskConfig *runtime.RawExtension `json:"taskConfig,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Rename this to `Config`

}
```

#### Status

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the status (current state) of the EtcdOperatorTasks custom resource.

- To capture the Status of the task a `taskStatus` field is define in status.
- If operation involves many stages, so to capture the status of intermediate or any stage, `.status.lastOperations` will be useful.
- `.status.lastError` to capture the last error occured for the task.

```go

// EtcdOperatorTasksStatus is the status for a EtcdOperatorTasks resource.
type EtcdOperatorTasksStatus struct {

  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for the resource.
  ObservedGeneration *int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  
  // Status of the last operation, one of pending, in-progress, completed, rejected or failed.

>   TaskStatus TaskState `json:"taskStatus"`

Reviewer 2: Rename this to `State` - still not clear if this is really required. Need to revisit this field.

  
  // Time at which operation has been triggered.
  InitiatedAt metav1.Time `json:"initiatedAt"`
  
  // LastError represents the last occurred error.

>   LastError *string `json:"lastError,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Change this to
```go
LastError []LastError
```
The custom type `LastError` will be introduced as part of another PR in druid and you can then re-use it. The custom type as defined in the work-in-progress is:
```go
// LastError stores details of the most recent error encountered for a resource.
type LastError struct {
	// Code is an error code that uniquely identifies an error.
	Code ErrorCode `json:"code"`
	// Description is a human-readable message indicating details of the error.
	Description string `json:"description"`
	// LastUpdateTime is the time the error was reported.
	LastUpdateTime metav1.Time `json:"lastUpdateTime"`
}

```

  
  // To capture status of last operation.

>   LastOps []LastOperation `json:"lastOperations"`

Reviewer 2: Rename this to `LastOperation` and its type should be `*LastOperation`. There is no need for it to be a slice.

> }

Reviewer 2: Add one more field to the status:
```go
Conditions []metav1.Condition
```

// TaskState represents the state of the task.
type TaskState string

> type LastOperation struct {

Reviewer 2: This you can re-use what is already been defined in druid. So instead provide a link to the existing type.

  Name opsName `json:"name"`
  // Status of the last operation, one of pending, progress, completed, failed.
  State OperationState `json:"state"`
  // Last time the operation state transitioned from one to another.
  LastTransitionTime metav1.Time `json:"lastTransitionTime"`
  // A human readable message indicating details about the last operation.
  Reason string `json:"reason"`
}

// OperationState represents the state of the operation.
type OperationState string
```

#### API Object

```yaml

apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: EtcdOperatorTasks
metadata:
    name: <name of operator tasks resource>
    namespace: <cluster namespace>
    generation: <specific generation of the desired state>
spec:
    taskType: < QuorumLossRecoveryTask | OnDemandSnapshotTask | OnDemandSnapCompactionTask | OnDemandMaintenanceTask | CopyBackupsTask >
    ttlSecondsAfterFinished: <time-to-live to garbage collect the custom resource>
    taskConfig: <task specific configuration>
status:
    observedGeneration: <specific observedGeneration of the resource>
    taskStatus: <pending | inProgress | completed | rejected | failed>
    initiatedAt: <time of intiation of this operation>

>     errors: <last error message if any>

Reviewer 2: Yes, it will be changed to `lastErrors`

>     lastOperations:

Reviewer 2: Yes this will be changed to `lastOperation`

}
```

- To add a new task via this framework the user have to define the task specific configuration and Controller (say EtcdOperatorTasks Controller) need to parse this data coming as [RawExtension](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime#RawExtension) according to [.spec.taskType](#spec)

##### Examples of Task specific config

1. Recovery from permanent quorum loss

```go
type QuorumLossRecoveryTaskConfig struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta

  // Total number of etcd cluster replicas.
  Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`
}
```

2. On demand full/delta snapshots

```go
// snapshotType can be full or delta snapshot
snapshotType string `json:"snapshotType"`

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta

  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  SnapshotType snapshotType `json:"snapshotType"`
}
```

3. On demand maintenance of etcd cluster

```go
type OnDemandMaintenanceTaskConfig struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta

  // MaintenanceType defines the maintenance operations need to be perform on etcd cluster.
  MaintenanceType maintenanceOps
}

type maintenanceOps struct {
  EtcdCompaction *bool `json:"etcd-compaction,omitempty"`

>   EtcdDefragmentation *bool `json:"defragmentation,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Etcd maintenance tasks are a different overall category but it is not really required for the consumer to know about this grouping. I think the intent is to allow the following combinations:

1. Only compaction
2. Only defragmentation
3. Compaction + Defragmentation.

`OnDemandMaintenanceTask` is way too generic. I get that the terminology is influenced by https://etcd.io/docs/v3.2/op-guide/maintenance/ but there are other things under maintenance as well.  Therefore there are 2 alternatives:

1. Define independent tasks for compaction and defrag.
2. Define a single task for both and name it as `OnDemandCompactionAndDefragmentationTask` which will automatically establish the order if both are opted for by the consumer.

>   EtcdDefragmentation *bool `json:"defragmentation,omitempty"`

Author: > Define independent tasks for compaction and defrag.
Define a single task for both and name it as OnDemandCompactionAndDefragmentationTask which will automatically establish the order if both are opted for by the consumer.
One can also define a new task SpaceQuotaExhaustionRecoveryTask which does -> compaction + defragmentation + removing the space quota alarm. Obviously we will re-use code across all of these tasks.

why 2 task doing the same or similar thing ?

| ---------------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| `QuorumLossRecoveryTask`         | `replicas` > 1      | if no. of etcd replicas is one then it's simple restoration case, not a quorum loss recovery.         |
| `OnDemandSnapshotTask`           | cluster should be healhty i.e quorum should be maintained        | taking a on-demand snapshot(full/delta) involves etcd cluster.           |
| `OnDemandSnapCompactionTask`     | NA          | on-demand snapshot-compaction runs in a seprate pod, hence it don't depend on health of etcd cluster members or any other conditions.       |
| `OnDemandMaintenanceTaskConfig`  | cluster should be healhty i.e quorum should be maintained         | on-demand etcd cluster maintenance depends on the health of etcd cluster.              |
| `CopyBackupsTask`                | NA         | copy-backup tasks run seprately without affecting or required help from etcd cluster.                      |

Steps to follow in case of multiple operator tasks:

- Check for duplicate task. If found simply `reject` the task.
- Verify if the pre-conditions of the task are met. If not, `reject` the task.

>    * If the pre-conditions are satisfied, add the task to the queue.

Reviewer 2: I think the queuing should do pre-condition check, only when the task is taken up for execution, at that time pre-conditions should be checked.

- For adding any new operations to "out-of-band" operator tasks, user must have to define the pre-conditions of that task, if any.

### Lifecycle of an Operator Tasks custom resources

#### Creation

* For [alpha feature](#alpha), creation of operator tasks custom resources can be done manually.
* For [GA](#beta---ga), the creation of operator tasks custom resources will done by `druidctl add task <taskName>`.

#### Deletion

To garbage collect the custom resources can be done by another controller (say TTL controller) with help of `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` specified in each operator tasks custom resource.

### Few Implementation Details

1. In QuorumLossRecoveryTask, recovery controller can't move to next operation until pervious operation moved to `complete` state.

> 2. If both type of maintenance is requested then controller should trigger etcd-compaction first then defragmentation.

Reviewer 2: > OnDemandETCDCompactionTask waits on PermanentQuorumLossRecoveryTask

There is no real `wait-on` relationship here but rather a `pre-condition` behavior which fits a bit better. Pre-conditions for `OnDemandETCDCompactionTask` are:

1. There should not be an existing `in-progress` task for the same etcd
2. Quorum should be established
And maybe we come with more pre-conditions or acceptance criteria for even accepting this task. If even one of these conditions are not met we reject the task and record the rejection in its status.

> 2. If both type of maintenance is requested then controller should trigger etcd-compaction first then defragmentation.

Reviewer 2: There are some tasks which can be run concurrently and some which perhaps needs to be sequenced. Need to revisit if this can easily be addressed by just defining pre-conditions.

> 2. If both type of maintenance is requested then controller should trigger etcd-compaction first then defragmentation.

Reviewer 2: For this version of the proposal we only define `pre-condition` which serves as a guard to accept or reject the task. Everything by default will be queued. In the next increment we will enhance this to provide both queueing with ordering along with concurrent execution capabilities.

  // +optional
  TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`

  // OwnerEtcdReference refers to the name and namespace of the corresponding 
  // etcd owner for which the task has been invoked.
  OwnerEtcdRefrence metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"ownerEtcdRefrence"`
}
```

#### Status

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the `Status` (current state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource as the custom resource's `Status` will be used to monitor the progress of the task.

* To capture the current state of a task, a field `.status.taskState` is defined in status.
* If an operation involves many stages, `.status.lastOperation` will be useful in capturing the status of any intermediate stage.

```go
// TaskState represents the state of the task.
type TaskState string

// EtcdOperatorTaskStatus is the status for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskStatus struct {
  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for the resource.
  ObservedGeneration *int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`
  // State of the task is the last known state of the task.

>   State TaskState `json:"taskState"`

Reviewer 5: Didn't we decide that we didn't want this to be called `State`, since it will end up looking like `Status.State`, which doesn't sound very good. Why don't we go with `Phase` instead?
cc @unmarshall

Author: I can rename it to `CurrentState` if you like but `Phase` doesn't seem correct to me 🤔

Author: I have renamed it to `CurrentState`. PTAL

Reviewer 5: I don't think CurrentState is a standard Kubernetes way of defining the status field which indicates the state of the resource/operation. The word `current` becomes redundant, since the status anyway reflects the current state of the operation, and doesn't reflect the "stale"/"previous" state of the operation on purpose.

From the [k8s API conventions document](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties), you can actually see that status fields that indicate the state/phase of the resource, should be preferably modelled as conditions instead.

@ishan16696 @unmarshall do you think this makes sense for `Task` resource?

Author: ```yaml
status:
  phase: rejected/failed
```
this doesn't seem good to me 🤔 , I prefer `taskState` or `currentState`

Reviewer 2: We (Shreyas and I) discussed and we cannot come with anything better. So just stick to `state` for now. If something strikes us later then we can change it then.

Reviewer 5: @ishan16696 can you please change it back from `CurrentState` to `State`? (both the field name and json tag)

Author: already made the change, just I haven't pushed it yet as I'm waiting for other comments to resolve.

>   // Time at which task move to any other state from "pending" state.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  // Time at which the task has moved from "pending" state to any other state.
```

  InitiatedAt metav1.Time `json:"initiatedAt"`
  // LastError represents the errors when processing the task.
  LastErrors []LastError `json:"lastErrors,omitempty"`
  // Captures the last operation.
  // +optional
  LastOperation *LastOperation `json:"lastOperation,omitempty"`
}

const (
  Failed TaskState = "Failed"
  Pending TaskState = "Pending"
  Rejected TaskState = "Rejected"
  Succeeded TaskState = "Succeeded"
  InProgress TaskState = "InProgress"
)

type LastOperation struct {
  // Name of the LastOperation.
  Name opsName `json:"name"`
  // Status of the last operation, one of pending, progress, completed, failed.
  State OperationState `json:"state"`

>   // Last time the operation state transitioned from one to another.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  // LastTransitionTime is the time at which the operation state last transitioned from one state to another.
```

  LastTransitionTime metav1.Time `json:"lastTransitionTime"`
  // A human readable message indicating details about the last operation.
  Reason string `json:"reason"`
}

// LastError stores details of the most recent error encountered for the task.
type LastError struct {
  // Code is an error code that uniquely identifies an error.
  Code ErrorCode `json:"code"`
  // Description is a human-readable message indicating details of the error.
  Description string `json:"description"`

>   // ObservedAt is the time the error was observed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  // ObservedAt is the time at which the error was observed.
```

##### Task Config

We do not need any config for this task. When creating an instance of `EtcdOperatorTask` for this scenario, `.spec.config` will be set to nil (unset).

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should be a quorum loss in a multi-member etcd cluster. For a single-member etcd cluster, invoking this task is unnecessary as the restoration of the single member is automatically handled by the backup-restore process.
* There should not already be a permanent-quorum-loss-recovery-task running for the same etcd cluster.

#### Trigger on-demand snapshot compaction

`Etcd-druid` provides a configurable [etcd-events-threshold](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md#druid-flags) flag. When this threshold is breached, then a [snapshot compaction](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/02-snapshot-compaction.md) is triggered for the etcd cluster. However, there are scenarios where an ad-hoc snapshot compaction may be required.

##### Possible scenarios

> * If a human operator needs to verify the integrity of etcd cluster backups, particularly in cases of potential backup corruption or re-encryption, they can initiate an `on-demand snapshot compaction` task. The success or failure of this snapshot compaction can offer valuable insights into these scenarios.

Reviewer 5: Didn't we decide that the reason for on-demand compaction is more towards creating a compacted full snapshot before performing a quorum loss recovery? So that restoration time is minimized. Checking for a corrupted backup should be its own Task, and should not be clubbed with on-demand compaction, which specifically talks about an on-demand compaction of full+delta snapshots into one single full snapshot, irrespective of what approach/implementation it uses underneath.

Author: > Didn't we decide that the reason for on-demand compaction is more towards creating a compacted full snapshot before performing a quorum loss recovery? 

yes, we did. I can add that too.

> Checking for a corrupted backup should be its own Task, and should not be clubbed with on-demand compaction, which specifically talks about an on-demand compaction of full+delta snapshots into one single full snapshot, irrespective of what approach/implementation it uses underneath.

why it need to be separate task doing the same thing ? If we need a separate task and that's the case then why we are introducing alerts for our compaction job ? 
AFAIR, we are introducing alerts for compaction feature, so that we can detect any cyber attack or snapshot corruption kind of scenarios quickly ... right ? I have mentioned the similar thing as `on-demand compaction` use case.

Reviewer 5: The task defines the purpose for performing the operation. While snapshot compaction can help detect backup corruptions, it is not performed *in order to* detect backup corruptions. It's just a happy side-effect of the underlying implementation of snapshot compaction, that's all.

Alerts for snapshot compaction jobs tell us if a compaction job failed. When a human operator checks why the compaction job failed, the reason for it is then revealed, which could either be due to insufficient resources for the compaction job, error in the code, or backup corruption. The alert does not tell you if the backup is corrupted, but only tells you if the job failed. It's the human operator's job to decide how to use that information.

Similarly, the on-demand snapshot compaction task simply tells druid to perform an on-demand snapshot compaction, in order to compact the latest set of snapshots into a single full snapshot. If this task fails, then it's the human operator's job to check why the task failed, and might then realise that there was a backup corruption. But detection of backup corruption is not a primary goal of the task as such.

I would request you to mention for this point in the proposal: `as an added benefit, snapshot compaction also helps detect backup corruption`, rather than framing it like `if a human operator needs to verify the integrity of backups, they can use this...`

Author: > The task defines the purpose for performing the operation.

It comes under `possible scenarios` or you can say possible usage/application of given a task, but that's doesn't limit the purpose of the task, you can use it somewhere else also(other than mentioned in doc) if you wish and that's the whole purpose, to eventually provide a flexibility to invoke any `out-of-band` task for any scenario.

> While snapshot compaction can help detect backup corruptions, it is not performed in order to detect backup corruptions. It's just a happy side-effect of the underlying implementation of snapshot compaction, that's all.
Alerts for snapshot compaction jobs tell us if a compaction job failed. When a human operator checks why the compaction job failed, the reason for it is then revealed, which could either be due to insufficient resources for the compaction job, error in the code, or backup corruption. The alert does not tell you if the backup is corrupted, but only tells you if the job failed. It's the human operator's job to decide how to use that information.

yes, I completely agree with you but understand a scenario where operator got suspicious about integrity of backups and to confirm that they have to wait for this `compaction job` to get trigger(event threshold to reach), to avoid waiting, they can just trigger `on-demand snapshot compaction`, and that will provide a "valuable insights" (as mentioned in doc). In doc, we have never mentioned it will detect the corruption of backups but it can surely filter out the shoots(if succeed => no issue, if failed => then operator need to dig)

> Similarly, the on-demand snapshot compaction task simply tells druid to perform an on-demand snapshot compaction, in order to compact the latest set of snapshots into a single full snapshot. If this task fails, then it's the human operator's job to check why the task failed, and might then realise that there was a backup corruption. But detection of backup corruption is not a primary goal of the task as such.

you are correct and that's why we have explicitly mentioned this point in doc
```
The success or failure of this snapshot compaction can offer valuable insights into these scenarios.
```
We have never mentioned that this will detect the corruption case, it will simply provide some "insights" and filter out the domain of suspicious shoot and then operator need to find out as you already pointed out.

> as an added benefit, snapshot compaction also helps detect backup corruption, rather than framing it like if a human operator needs to verify the integrity of backups, they can use this...

this is already under the heading: `Possible Scenarios` then why to create one more sub heading as added benefit, IMO `added benefit` is seems to be just a synonym for `Possible Scenarios`.

Author: I have pushed the changes, PTAL

* [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener), a cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot.
type SnapshotType string

const (
  FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
  DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"
)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  Type SnapshotType `json:"type"`
}
```

```yaml
spec:
  config: {

>     "type": <type of on-demand snapshot>,

Reviewer 5: Thanks for adding YAML representation as well. Can you please remove the double-quotes from the field keys? For this as well as other YAML representations of `config`, since the double-quotes are not necessary, even for raw extensions.

Author: why you think so, it's not necessary ? It's a raw extension which comes as `[]byte` later decode to `string` by controller. IMO, it's good to convey the idea again that it's a raw extension, not normal yaml.
please take a look at [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/829ed199f4e0454344a5bc5ef7859a01ef9b8e22/pkg/runtime/types.go#L77-L80)

Reviewer 5: Double quoting keys is necessary for JSON objects, but not for YAML. You can check this example [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#rawextension), or also look at `spec.provider.controlPlaneConfig` or `spec.provider.infrastructureConfig` for any Gardener shoot.

One thing I also noticed is that rawExtension cannot be any arbitrary structure, but also has an `apiVersion` and `kind`. I think this needs to be relooked at in this proposal.

cc @unmarshall

Author: make sense.
> but also has an apiVersion and kind

I also saw this, but don't any strong opinion on this. I can add that too.

Author: I have addressed your review comments @shreyas-s-rao  and I have also added `apiVersion` and `kind`. PTAL

Reviewer 5: Thanks for making the change.

    "sourceStore": <source object store specification>,
    "targetStore": <target object store specification>,
    "maxBackupAge": <maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied>,
    "maxBackups": <maximum no. of backups that will be copied>,
  },
```

> Note: For detailed object store specification please refer [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/9c5f8254e3aeb24c1e3e88d17d8d1de336ce981b/api/v1alpha1/types_common.go#L15-L29)

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not already be a `copy-backups` task running.

> Note: `copy-backups-task` runs as a separate job, and it operates only on the backup bucket, hence it doesn't depend on health of etcd cluster members.

> Note: `copy-backups-task` has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `copy-backups-task` can be harmonized with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

## Metrics

Authors proposed to introduce the following metrics:

* `etcddruid_operator_task_duration_seconds` : Histogram which captures the runtime for each etcd operator task.
  Labels:

>   * Key : `type`, Value: all supported tasks
>   * Key: `state`, Value: One-Of {failed, succeeded, rejected}
>   * Key: `etcd`, Value: name of the target etcd resource
>   * Key: `etcd_namespace`, Value: namespace of the target etcd resource
> 
> * `etcddruid_operator_tasks_total`: Counter which counts the number of etcd operator tasks.
>   Labels:
>   * Key : `type`, Value: all supported tasks
>   * Key: `state`, Value: One-Of {failed, succeeded, rejected}
>   * Key: `etcd`, Value: name of the target etcd resource
>   * Key: `etcd_namespace`, Value: namespace of the target etcd resource

Reviewer 4: Formatting for the first row in both tasks, removed the space before the colon.
```suggestion
  * Key: `type`, Value: all supported tasks
  * Key: `state`, Value: One-Of {failed, succeeded, rejected}
  * Key: `etcd`, Value: name of the target etcd resource
  * Key: `etcd_namespace`, Value: namespace of the target etcd resource

* `etcddruid_operator_tasks_total`: Counter which counts the number of etcd operator tasks.
  Labels:
  * Key: `type`, Value: all supported tasks
  * Key: `state`, Value: One-Of {failed, succeeded, rejected}
  * Key: `etcd`, Value: name of the target etcd resource
  * Key: `etcd_namespace`, Value: namespace of the target etcd resource
```

---
title: operator out-of-band tasks
dep-number: 05
creation-date: 6th Dec'2023
status: implementable
authors:
- "@ishan16696" 
- "@unmarshall"
- "@seshachalam-yv"
reviewers:
- "etcd-druid-maintainers"
---

# DEP-05: Operator Out-of-band Tasks

## Table of Contents

* [DEP-05: Operator Out-of-band Tasks](#dep-05-operator-out-of-band-tasks)

>   * [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

Reviewer 2: Just a small nit - can you remove TOC from the list here.

* [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener), a cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot.
type SnapshotType string

const (
  FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
  DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"
)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  Type SnapshotType `json:"type"`
}
```

```yaml
spec:
  config:

>     apiversion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1

Reviewer 2: we do not need to have `apiversion` and `kind` as part of the config. Instead of using `RawExtension` just change the type to `string` and use YAML literal operator to specify a yaml as the value for config.
Example:
```yaml
spec:
  config: |
    type: <type of on-demand snapshot>
```
Can you make this change elsewhere as well?

### Custom Resource API

`EtcdOperatorTask` is the new custom resource that will be introduced. This API will be in `v1alpha1` version and will be subject to change. We will be respecting [Kubernetes Deprecation Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/).

```go
// EtcdOperatorTask represents an out-of-band operator task resource.
type EtcdOperatorTask struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta
  metav1.ObjectMeta

  // Spec is the specification of the EtcdOperatorTask resource.
  Spec EtcdOperatorTaskSpec `json:"spec"`
  // Status is most recently observed status of the EtcdOperatorTask resource.
  Status EtcdOperatorTaskStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Spec

The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the spec (desired state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

* To capture the type of `out-of-band` operator task to be performed, `.spec.type` field should be defined. It can have values from all supported `out-of-band` tasks eg. "OnDemandSnaphotTask", "QuorumLossRecoveryTask" etc.

> * To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.config` field should be defined of type `string` as each task can have different input configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To capture the configuration specific to each task, a `.spec.config` field should be defined. It is expected that the configuration is supplied as JSON string.
```

Reviewer 2: I thought we discussed to remove describing only a subset of fields, right?

Author: but I think you already mentioned that in `spec` , we have mentioned only +required fields, which is fine https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/757#discussion_r1589007631

```go
// EtcdOperatorTaskSpec is the spec for a EtcdOperatorTask resource.
type EtcdOperatorTaskSpec struct {
  
  // Type specifies the type of out-of-band operator task to be performed. 
  Type string `json:"type"`

>   // Config is a task specific configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Config is a task specific configuration specified as serialised JSON string.
```

  Config string `json:"config,omitempty"`

  // TTLSecondsAfterFinished is the time-to-live to garbage collect the 
  // related resource(s) of task once it has been completed.
  // +optional
  TTLSecondsAfterFinished *int32 `json:"ttlSecondsAfterFinished,omitempty"`

  // OwnerEtcdReference refers to the name and namespace of the corresponding 
  // Etcd owner for which the task has been invoked.
  OwnerEtcdRefrence types.NamespacedName `json:"ownerEtcdRefrence"`
}
```

#### Status

> The authors propose that the following fields should be specified in the `Status` (current state) of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource as the custom resource's `Status` will be used to monitor the progress of the task.

Reviewer 2: For `Status` using `should be specified` is incorrect, since the users never set anything in `Status`. I am in general not very happy about only describing a few fields and leaving out the rest. For `Spec` it can still be fine because you have defined `mandatory` fields but there also its really not required. I am of the opinion that you either describe/detail out every field or leave out all and only make it as part of the doc-string in the golang snippet.

  LastErrors []LastError `json:"lastErrors,omitempty"`
  // Captures the last operation.
  // +optional
  LastOperation *LastOperation `json:"lastOperation,omitempty"`
}

type LastOperation struct {
  // Name of the LastOperation.
  Name opsName `json:"name"`
  // Status of the last operation, one of pending, progress, completed, failed.
  State OperationState `json:"state"`
  // LastTransitionTime is the time at which the operation state last transitioned from one state to another.
  LastTransitionTime metav1.Time `json:"lastTransitionTime"`
  // A human readable message indicating details about the last operation.
  Reason string `json:"reason"`
}

// LastError stores details of the most recent error encountered for the task.
type LastError struct {
  // Code is an error code that uniquely identifies an error.
  Code ErrorCode `json:"code"`
  // Description is a human-readable message indicating details of the error.
  Description string `json:"description"`
  // ObservedAt is the time at which the error was observed.
  ObservedAt metav1.Time `json:"observedAt"`
}

// TaskState represents the state of the task.
type TaskState string

const (

>   Failed TaskState = "Failed"
>   Pending TaskState = "Pending"
>   Rejected TaskState = "Rejected"
>   Succeeded TaskState = "Succeeded"
>   InProgress TaskState = "InProgress"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  TaskStateFailed TaskState = "Failed"
  TaskStatePending TaskState = "Pending"
  TaskStateRejected TaskState = "Rejected"
  TaskStateSucceeded TaskState = "Succeeded"
  TaskStateInProgress TaskState = "InProgress"
```

)

// OperationState represents the state of last operation.
type OperationState string

const (

>   Failed OperationState = "OperationStateFailed"
>   Pending OperationState = "OperationStatePending"
>   Completed OperationState = "OperationStateCompleted"
>   InProgress OperationState = "OperationStateInProgress"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  OperationStateFailed OperationState = "Failed"
  OperationStatePending OperationState = "Pending"
  OperationStateCompleted OperationState = "Completed"
  OperationStateInProgress OperationState = "InProgress"
```

)
```

> ### Custom Resource API object

Reviewer 2: The title should be `Custom Resource Definition`

Author: It's CR object not the CRD ... right ?

status:
    observedGeneration: <specific observedGeneration of the resource>
    state: <last known current state of the out-of-band task>
    initiatedAt: <time at which task move to any other state from "pending" state>
    lastErrors:
    - code: <error-code>
      description: <description of the error>
      observedAt: <time the error was observed>
    lastOperation:
      name: <operation-name>
      state: <task state as seen at the completion of last operation>
      lastTransitionTime: <time of transition to this state>
      reason: <reason/message if any>
```

### Lifecycle

#### Creation

Task(s) can be created by creating an instance of the `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource specific to a task.

> Note: In future, either a `kubectl` extension plugin or a `druidctl` tool will be introduced. Dedicated sub-commands will be created for each `out-of-band` task. This will drastically increase the usability for an operator for performing such tasks, as the CLI extension will automatically create relevant instance(s) of `EtcdOperatorTask` with the provided configuration.

#### Execution

> * Authors propose to introduce a new controller (let's call it `operator-task-controller`) which watches for `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Authors propose to introduce a new controller which watches for `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.
```

Reviewer 2: Since there is just one controller, one need not name it. The suggested name `operator-task-controller` is also not the one that we will eventually use. So i would refrain from naming it. If we have more than one controller then this would be fine.

* Each `out-of-band` task may have some task specific configuration defined in [.spec.config](#spec).
* The controller (`operator-task-controller`) needs to parse this task specific config, which comes as a [string](#spec), according to the schema defined for each task.

> * Moreover, all tasks have to adhere to some prerequisites (a.k.a `pre-conditions`) which will be necessary to execute the task. Authors propose to define pre-conditions for each task, which must be met for the task to be eligible for execution otherwise that task should be rejected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For every `out-of-band` task, a set of `pre-conditions` can be defined. These pre-conditions are evaluated against the current state of the target etcd cluster. Based on the evaluation result (boolean), the task is permitted or denied execution.
```

* If multiple tasks are invoked simultaneously or in `pending` state, then they will be executed in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) manner.

> > Note: Dependent ordering among tasks will be addressed later which may enable concurrent execution of tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: Dependent ordering among tasks will be addressed later which will enable concurrent execution of tasks when possible.
```

#### Deletion

> Upon completion of the task, whether it has failed, succeeded, or been rejected, Etcd-druid will ensure the garbage collection of the custom resources and any other Kubernetes resources created to execute the task. This will be done according to the `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec), or a default expiry time will be assumed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upon completion of the task, irrespective of its final state, `Etcd-druid` will ensure the garbage collection of the task custom resource and any other Kubernetes resources created to execute the task. This will be done according to the `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` if defined in the [spec](#spec), or a default expiry time will be assumed.
```

If a human operator does not wish to wait for the scheduled full/delta snapshot, they can trigger an on-demand (out-of-schedule) full/delta snapshot on the etcd cluster, which will be taken by the `leading-backup-restore`.

##### Possible scenarios

* An on-demand full snapshot can be triggered if scheduled snapshot fails due to any reason.
* [Gardener Shoot Hibernation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_hibernate.md): Every etcd cluster incurs an inherent cost of preserving the volumes even when a gardener shoot control plane is scaled down, i.e the shoot is in a hibernated state. However, it is possible to save on hyperscaler costs by invoking this task to take a full snapshot before scaling down the etcd cluster, and deleting the etcd data volumes afterwards.

> * [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener), a cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Gardener Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md): In [gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener), a cluster control plane can be moved from one seed cluster to another. This process currently requires the etcd data to be replicated on the target cluster, so a full snapshot of the etcd cluster in the source seed before the migration would allow for faster restoration of the etcd cluster in the target seed.
```

##### Task Config

```go
// SnapshotType can be full or delta snapshot.
type SnapshotType string

const (

>   FullSnapshot SnapshotType = "full-snapshot"
>   DeltaSnapshot SnapshotType = "delta-snapshot"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  SnapshotTypeFull SnapshotType = "full"
  SnapshotTypeDelta SnapshotType = "delta"
```

)

type OnDemandSnapshotTaskConfig struct {
  // Type of on-demand snapshot.
  Type SnapshotType `json:"type"`
}
```

```yaml
spec:
  config: |

>     type: <type of on-demand snapshot>

Reviewer 2: In the API documentation we mentioned that we expect a JSON and then we actually provide a YAML. Is that what we agreed upon? Similar is the case for all tasks where config is present.

  TargetStore StoreSpec `json:"targetStore"`

  // MaxBackupAge is the maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied.
  // By default all backups will be copied.
  // +optional
  MaxBackupAge *uint32 `json:"maxBackupAge,omitempty"`

  // MaxBackups is the maximum number of backups that will be copied starting with the most recent ones.
  // +optional
  MaxBackups *uint32 `json:"maxBackups,omitempty"`
}
```

```yaml
spec:
  config: |
    sourceStore: <source object store specification>
    targetStore: <target object store specification>
    maxBackupAge: <maximum age in days that a backup must have in order to be copied>
    maxBackups: <maximum no. of backups that will be copied>
```

> Note: For detailed object store specification please refer [here](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/9c5f8254e3aeb24c1e3e88d17d8d1de336ce981b/api/v1alpha1/types_common.go#L15-L29)

##### Pre-Conditions

* There should not already be a `copy-backups` task running.

> Note: `copy-backups-task` runs as a separate job, and it operates only on the backup bucket, hence it doesn't depend on health of etcd cluster members.

> > Note: `copy-backups-task` has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `copy-backups-task` can be harmonized with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: `copy-backups-task` has already been implemented and it's currently being used in [Control Plane Migration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/07-shoot-control-plane-migration.md) but `copy-backups-task` will be harmonized with `EtcdOperatorTask` custom resource.
```

  OperationStatus OperationState `json:"status"`
  // Time at which quorum loss recovery tasks triggered.
  InitiatedAt metav1.Time `json:"initiatedAt"`
  // LastError represents the last occurred error.
  LastError *string `json:"lastError,omitempty"`
  // To capture status of last operation.
  LastOps []LastOperation
}

```

**Note**: If both type of maintenance is requested then controller should trigger etcd-compaction first then defragmentation.

### Dealing with multiple operator tasks simultaneously

It is quite apparent that multiple "out-of-band" operator tasks can be triggered simultaneously. The challenge then becomes determining the precedence of each operation.
For instance, let's say an operator triggers an on-demand full snapshot task that doesn't complete. Then, the human operator realizes the cluster has lost its quorum, so they trigger a `recover-quorum-loss` task.
In this scenario, our controller will detect two pending tasks at the same time. The question that arises is: which task should be executed first?

To deal with such scenario, authors are proposing that each operator out-of-bands task will divided mainly into 2 priority class:

1. Cluster-ops

> 2. Backup-ops

Reviewer 6: Somewhat artificial/not exactly future-proof.

| `on-demand snapshot`             | Cluster-ops         | taking a on-demand snapshot(full/delta) involves etcd cluster, hence it's assign to `Cluster-ops` priority class.                                       |
| `on-demand snapshot-compaction`  | Backup-ops          | on-demand snapshot-compaction runs in a seprate pod, hence it don't depend on cluster.                                                                  |
| `on-demand cluster maintenance`  | Cluster-ops         | on-demand etcd cluster maintenance depends on the health of etcd cluster, hence it's assign to `Cluster-ops` priority class.                            |
| `copy-backup`                    | Backup-ops          | copy-backup tasks run seprately without affecting or required help from etcd cluster.                                                                   |

1. Priority class `Cluster-ops` have 3 operator tasks(as of now)

- recover-quorum-loss
- on-demand cluster maintenance
- on-demand snapshot

2. Priority class `Backup-ops` have 2 operator tasks(as of now)

- on-demand snapshot-compaction
- copy-backup task

Usage of priority class in deciding the precedence of simultaneous operator tasks:

> - All the operations in priorityClass: `Backup-ops` are independent from each other as well as independent from all operations under priorityClass:`Cluster-ops` as these `Backup-ops` can get execute seprately without depending on external factors like etcd cluster health, quorum etc.

Reviewer 6: Somewhat (very) confusing to not find `OnDemandSnapshot` below the backup operations and instead under the less well defined (bucket) group of (generic) cluster operations. You probably did that so that you could make this statement here. This looks very contrived to me and I find it not a good decision (at all).
